>> Hey there
Haskell Weekly listeners.
Welcome back to the
Haskell Weekly podcast.
It's supposed to be weekly, but it's
been about a month since our last one.
Apologies for that.
I'm your host Taylor Fausak.
I'm the director of software
engineering at ACI Learning.
And with me today as per usual, is Cam.
Thanks for joining me, Cam.
>> Hello, hello.
It's good to be back.
I know we've been trying to
do this for a little bit.
Um, but yeah, my name's Cam Gera.
Uh, I am a senior software
engineer at MotoRefi, so, uh,
yeah, excited to be here today.
And, uh, we got some fun stuff, um, recent
released in the Haskell, uh, ecosystem.
And so we're excited to share that
with you guys and, um, honestly
just spend some time and break it
down, be a little more casual today.
Um, you know, get, get to here.
Cause I haven't really heard what
Taylor's went up to in a minute.
So Taylor what's been going
on over at ACI Learning,
>> all kinds of stuff.
The big ticket item is merging with
practice labs, uh, who is not exactly a
competitor of ours, but another company
in the same space who has a complimentary
skillset and product offering.
So.
Uh, my life recently has been talking
with the folks over at practice labs and
trying to identify some commonalities
between our engineering orgs.
What can we share?
What do we do differently?
What do we each — uh, which unique
skills do each of us bring to the
table and can we share with each other?
So that's been going great, really
looking forward to continuing that.
Um, and for me personally, uh, I've been
doing some work on the Brittany code base,
which is a Haskell source code formatter,
uh, that we use here at ACI Learning.
And it hasn't been updated to support
GHC 9.0, which came out a while ago.
And today we're going to be talking
about 9.2, but, um, I'm trying to
bring it up to date and make it work so
that it can be used as part of H L S.
>> Ooh nice.
Yeah, we, uh, haven't been using uh
Brittany and we used it for a minute.
Um, but we've been focusing
more so on fourmolu.
So we're using ormolu's I dunno,
customizable brother fourmolu and,
uh, that's been surprisingly good.
Um, I know there's a couple more
things that still need to be
implemented in fourmolu to make
me not, uh, my eyes not burn.
Um, when I'm looking at, you know,
some Haskell code, uh, cause right
now like, oh dude, the one that's most
frustrating to me is the trailing arrows.
So if you have a function with
multiple parameters and in the
type signature if you have.
you know oh so long.
And you want to divvy it up.
It's like, everything's
at the end of the line.
And it's, I'm like, ah, I don't like this.
It's just, it's just
different from the norm.
Um, if you're a normal user, I get it.
You, you like that?
That's
>> cool.
Yeah.
I've always said that I don't really
care what the formatting looks like.
I just care that it's automated,
but, ormolu has really.
Pushed that pushed me
to be honest about that.
Like, I do care a little bit about
how it looks and I don't like
how ormolu looks, but I do like
everything else about that project.
Like it's well-maintained and they
have a lot of good tools and they
have like check mode and they have
a GitHub actions for running it.
I think all that stuff is great.
And I'm going to try to
do the same for Brittany.
Nice.
>> That'll be good.
Yeah.
I mean, when we were kind of thinking
since, you know, really last time
since the last time we've talked, um,
you know, at MotoRefi we've just been.
All out on, uh, creating a new product
and that's really what the team I'm
on and, and what we're focusing on.
So, um, for me, it was all right.
We just need to pick a formatter
for now and go with it.
And so we thought about Brittany
thought about ormolu and then fourmolu
was there and I was like, alright,
I can get on board with fourmolu.
Like, that's fine.
Let's, let's move forward with it.
So, um, you know, I didn't really
make too much of a fuss about either.
Um, because at the same time, like
you said, it's automated, like as
long as it's automated and it works.
We're good.
Um, that, that's what we care about.
So, um, that's kinda my stance
on where, where we're at at
>> the moment.
So other than source code formatting,
what else have you been up to?
You said building a new product.
That's exciting greenfield's always fun.
Yeah,
>> yeah.
Yeah.
It's been fun.
So, um, we've been of.
The previous product was a monolith
with its giant code Ruby code base.
Uh, and we're not touching that.
So we're actually, um, actually
going though with a microservice
architecture, um, with event sourcing.
And so, uh, At the beginning,
I was a little bit like, wait,
what, why, why are we doing this?
And I'm still like every once in a
while, like, ah, I wish we had like more
shared code, but we're really trying
to get better about bounded context.
And that's kind of the whole push for,
uh, event sourcing and, uh, microservices.
So, you know, we created four new
services in the last month that, um,
kind of uses event bus as more or
less or event log as more of a less.
Means to do actions.
Um, you know, so obviously we have
an endpoint that will take the
information, uh, that is needed and push
it into this event log event stream.
And then we'll have, we have a couple
services who listened to various,
uh, events on that event log.
And so that was, uh, it's been fun.
It's I was impressed with how
fast we were able to iterate.
Um, we got all four services up with.
A week before our deadline.
Um, and so, uh, it was yeah.
All out.
Um, and now we're just kinda
starting to add some more services
and different, uh, things that we
wanted to be able to do after MVP.
So Monday is our official launch.
>> You say that's the power
of Haskell you're able to deliver
quick, more quickly than the
old fashioned Ruby services.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
I think it's.
Proven that, you know, Haskell does
really work well in production.
And, you know, you can start up
a whole Greenfield project and
have it done in three weeks.
Uh, and that's cause that's what
we did, you know, and it's, you
know, obviously kudos to our team.
Our team did a great job, uh,
but also kudos to Haskell.
It gave us that opportunity just
to start go, compiler is going to
help us hold our hand along the way.
And you know, we'll kind of make
choices and ideally that generally
they're pretty good choices.
So, you know, we are using
servant as like our server.
Um, and that was kind of, you know,
repeated through for like a health
check for each service, just to make
sure that the thing is up and running.
Um, and so that, you
know, was all pretty easy.
And actually another cool thing
we got to do in that process was
create a stack template because a
lot of our services have the same.
And so we, anytime we need to start up
a new service, we just use stack new
the name of it in the template name and
boom, you got all the lines of code.
You need generator for you, uh,
what the name populated through.
So that was a pretty cool
like experiment we did.
Um, as after we created the
first service, we did that to
create the rest of the services.
It, uh, set us up for
success there, for sure.
>> Yeah.
Cool.
Well, thanks for sharing.
I look forward to hearing more in
the coming weeks about how this
project develops, um, cause I'm sure
like you mentioned, you know, just
picking a formatter, just getting some
something out there is really good.
And I think one of the strengths
of Haskell is being able to change
it later, refactor it confidently.
So I'm curious if y'all have any
interesting refactoring stories.
>> Oh yeah.
That's that's our, after, after
lunch we have our next sprint is
to kind of come back together.
Talk about the decisions you made,
figure out if that's really what
we want to do, get some consistency
in the code base because you
do, we want to qualify imports.
Do we want to, you know, just
important, the whole fricking module.
It's like, well, how do
we want to write our code?
And so that's something we're
going to be coming back to.
Um, So I'm sure I'll be able to
update you guys with that next
week and the following weeks.
So, because our goal is
to make Haskell weekly.
This is the goal weekly
being the key word there?
Well,
>> uh, so let's get into
some of the news from this week.
Uh, we'll start with maybe
the smaller ticket item, which
is the Haskell weekly survey.
The state of Haskell survey, um, is
out, I released it on November 1st
and it will be open for two weeks,
which is through November 15th.
Uh, I do this every year.
I've done it for the past four years.
So this is the fifth year.
And, um, yeah, it's just a, your
opportunity as a member of the Haskell
community or somebody interested
in Haskell, if you don't feel
like you're part of the community.
To weigh in on how you think
Haskell as a language is what
you think of the community, how
things can be improved, all that.
And I'll do what I've done every
year, which is post the results at the
end and do a little bit of analysis.
So that cam you asked earlier,
what, uh, what have I been doing
recently, uh, gearing up for that?
So, uh, the survey is a little
bit different this year to
overlap more with some other
programming communities and also.
Looking forward to next year,
the Haskell foundation will
likely be taking over the survey.
So this year is kind of a
transitionary period for that.
Nice, yeah I was actually
>> just about to ask like fast
Haskell foundation hasn't taken it yet.
>> Not yet.
So I've been talking with Andrew
Boardman, who's the executive
director of the Haskell foundation.
Um, and they're definitely
interested in taking it over and
reshaping it just a little bit.
Uh, Yeah, that will happen next year.
So this year it's still just me.
Um, but I'll continue to do
what I've done previous years.
How much
>> did you charge him to take it?
I'm just kidding.
It's all for the community.
>> Yes.
Um, so yeah, if you're listening to
this, please, uh, I'll leave a link
in the show notes, or you can just
head over to Haskell weekly.news
and there will be a link there.
Go take the survey, tell everyone,
you know, to take the survey.
I think we're up to, we're recording
this on Friday the fifth and it's up
to about eight or 900 respondents.
So trying to push that number up.
Yeah.
Uh,
>> I'm guilty of not doing it yet,
so I need to step up my game apparently,
but that's why we do Haskell weekly so
we can remember to do things like this.
So thanks Taylor for that to,
yeah, I think it's exciting.
I always enjoy it.
I just need to.
Sit down and do it.
>> Yeah.
It'll take about 10 minutes.
>> Just like Shia
LaBeouf just do it yesterday.
You said tomorrow.
>> That's right.
Um, but yeah, that's not the
big ticket news from this week.
Cam, You want to tee us up?
>> Drum roll, please?
It's probably like, uh, yeah,
whoever listens to this.
I'm sorry.
Yeah.
GHC 9.2.1 has been released.
Woo.
Ooh.
So there's a lot of fun, cool things
that happened with this release of GHC.
Obviously it's going to take a
little bit of time to get Stackage
up to date and all that fun stuff.
Cause, uh, but yeah.
Why don't you share Taylor, since
you let me do the announcement,
why don't you share some of
the highlights that are coming.
Sure.
>> So to start, there are just
so many new things in this release.
Uh, we're not going to have
time to get into all of them.
Otherwise, this would be like a two
hour long episode, but I'll leave
a link to the, uh, release notes,
which I encourage you to go read.
We're just going to hit the highlights.
Uh, first big one, which isn't,
um, a change to like the code or
anything like that, but a change
to the code generator on the back
end is that GHC can now produce
native code for the apple  architecture,
which means all those fancy new
MacBooks and Mac book, uh, excuse me,
Mac minis and those new MacBook pros.
Uh, you can now compile GHC that will
run natively rather than get interpreted
through the Rosetta, um, you know,
changing from x86 64 into arm 64.
So, uh, that just means it'll be
faster, better tighter integration.
I think there were also a lot of
kind of incidental, um, changes or
improvements to the code generator.
As a result of this were needing to
differentiate between arm 64 and x86
64 made things more, um, like precise.
So one of the things is like
a word eight data type I think
will actually be smaller.
Like only use eight bits rather than
it used to, I think take 64 bits.
Go read the release notes.
There's way more information about that.
Just exciting native on M1
>> yeah.
So that means a Haskell community can
be more, uh, more apple purchasers
I'm in, I don't know that M1
Macs and M1 pro look pretty cool.
I don't know, per their
comparisons with like the I9 and
>> whatnot.
Yeah.
They're super fast.
I, myself, have an M1 Mac mini at home.
Uh, and I also have a windows machine.
Also.
I have a Linux machine, so I use
GHC on all those I haven't yet
got nine dot two on that Mac mini.
So I can't, I don't have an experience
report for, oh, it's blazing faster.
It's super slow, but I
expect it to be blazing fast.
Yeah.
>> We'll have to, uh, check
in with you on that next week.
See how That's going a little pet project.
Ah, cool.
Yeah.
Um, I, I don't know if you
can hear Roomba I just.
That's running off in the
background, DJ Roomba, DJ Roomba.
But yeah, so, uh, I know there was a
lot of changes in the area of records.
Um, you want to talk about some
of the language extensions, um,
that they, uh, added and, or
>> modified.
Yeah.
And I apologize in advance.
If I get any of these wrong, I
haven't been paying close attention
to all of the proposals and
implementations of these things,
but yes, there are a lot of changes.
Records and record fields.
And the end result is that you can now
write code in Haskell with the more
typical record dot field notation that is
popular in most object oriented languages.
And you can have that read
a real field on a record.
So if you define like a person type
and they have a name and you can now
say person.name, Read that field out.
Um, or you can have synthetic
fields where it's computed when
you call it or something like that.
Um, like I said, I haven't been
paying super close attention to this,
but that's my understanding of it.
And this also rounds off some of
the rough edges when it comes to
records where you can have, um,
multiple fields with the same name.
And then when you do that dot access
into them, it will disambiguate based on
which thing it is that you're calling.
Um, and, uh, I think record updates.
Are they also changed in this release?
I think they're still changing, but the
idea is that, uh, you will be able to do
a record update, which is in the curly
brackets where you say like a nested
field in there where you can say person
dot, name dot first equals something.
And it will do a deep update into that.
Rather than forcing you to like
unwrap each level along the way
and update the very inner thing.
>> That'll be nice I feel like,
uh, one thing that, one other language
that could use something like that
would be, uh, at least for like the.
Changing of fields would be Elm.
Yes.
Gotta to like unwrap each section and then
go to do the thing and then rewrap it.
And it's like, uh,
>> yeah, it's all this boiler
plate for basically no reason.
And in Elm, you can't even use
lenses, which is the common
Haskell way around this problem.
And maybe the best way to talk
about the record updates in GHC
nine dot two is that it gets.
Core language with some extensions,
closer to what you can currently
do with lenses as a library.
So I'm sure that people who use lens
may see that as a downside, like,
Hey, you know, we have this powerful
thing that we were able to implement
without language support, but I know
that a lot of people in the Haskell
community are they shy away from lenses.
And so having it built into
the language is a big plus.
>> That's been something for us
is like, kind of figuring out, alright,
what packages do we want to use?
And what are the side effects with that?
Oh, what's going to, you know, use
lenses to, for updating documentation
with swagger and it's like, all
right, what is the dot tilde?
Do?
What about the dot till
the curly or question mark?
Oh yeah.
That's what all these do.
So, uh, yeah, I think, uh, creating
some more language support for things
like that without having to use lenses.
Um, another thing one we've already
talked about previously, uh, in a,
in a previous episode is the GHC
20, 21, uh, language extension set.
And so I think with 9.2 0.1,
that is now a supported thing.
Um, and yeah.
What
>> do you think about that?
I'm really excited about this.
And in fact, uh, in reading the release
notes, Discovered something about this
that I didn't know before, which is that
when you're defining a Haskell project or
package, I should say, in your cabal file
or your package dot yaml, you typically
say what your default languages and
you pick one of the language reports.
It's either Haskell 98,
or it's Haskell 2010.
And for the most part, those are
interchangeable uh Haskell 2010.
Isn't a radical departure from Haskell 98.
It just shores up some things and enables.
Um, I'm small extensions, but I think
with this new release, if you don't
specify a default language, you're
going to get GHC 20, 21 by default,
which means a lot of new extensions.
They don't actually list the whole
extension set here, but there are.
Tens of extensions that this enables
and it's, you know, there was a lot
of feedback that went into this, um,
partially motivated by the Haskell survey.
So again, please fill that out.
If you haven't shameless plug.
I love it.
Exactly.
Um, but yeah, so it's stuff like, you
know, uh, Lambda case or like multiparam
type classes, I'm rattling these off,
but I don't actually know that these
in particular are enabled, but they
kind of quality of life improvements
that feel like they should be on.
But haven't been because it's such
a conservative language standard.
Now they're bundled into this GHC 20,
21 language set and I'm really excited.
>> Yeah.
I know numeric underscores is in there.
I was, uh, working with a buddy
and I was like, he enabled uh that,
and I was like, this is weird.
Like I just haven't used this before.
And he's like, yeah,
well it's in GHC 2021.
I was like, all right, cool.
Let's do it.
Uh, so yeah, I've definitely
had my fair share.
like hm this could be
nice, just to be here.
Uh, I think we've got quite a few language
extensions ourselves, so be cool to
see how many of those overlap with GHC
20, 21 and how many we're not using.
And maybe that would be another helpful
thing to, you know, iterate quickly.
>> Yeah.
And one of the things I really like
about this is that it provides a
common base or common subset for the
community to kind of rally around.
So right now I think the status quo is.
Everyone has kind of their own mental
checklist of that's a okay extension.
That's a bad one.
And this one I'm kind of ambivalent
about, and maybe not for every extension,
there are a bunch, but you know, you
say undecidable instances and some
people are like, Ooh, I hate that.
Or, oh yeah, that's fine.
I'll enable that, whatever.
Um, and by having a group of
stuff altogether in GHC 20, 21,
we can as a community, just say
like, this is what I'm using
you're probably already
familiar with all of it.
This is our new baseline.
All right.
Let's have all these features and
make development life better for
>> us.
Yep, exactly.
Yeah.
So that's, that's good.
Uh, that's another great
win for GHC 9.2 0.1.
Uh, are there any other
like topic talking points?
I mean, like you said, we
could talk for hours on this.
And I want to be cognizant of
everyone's time, including yours.
Now you're a busy man with talking
to people over the pond and whatnot.
>> You're busy too working
on that new product, but there is
one more thing I wanted to talk
about, um, which is GHC exact print.
And at the top of the show, I was
talking about Brittany, the source
code formatter Brittany is actually
built on top of GHC exact print,
which used to be a separate library.
And if you're not familiar with
it, GHC exact print is sort of like
the pretty printer that doesn't
actually make things prettier.
All that it does is parse your
source file into an AST and then
give you back exactly the same thing.
Hence the name, exact print.
This seems kind of useless,
but it's actually really
useful for doing refactorings.
So if you want to parse a file and
then say, Something that HLint does
a lot, for example, is like, if you
have an expression where you say, when
not something do this, you can replace
that with, unless something do this.
And HLint actually leans on a different
tool to do those refactorings.
But with GHC exact print, you
could implement those types of
refactorings by parsing the AST, and
then transforming the little part
of the AST you're interested in, and
then writing it back out to a file.
Or obviously you can use it as the basis
for a pretty printer where you parse the
AST and then transform not the, um, like
not what it means, but what it looks like.
And then write that back out to a file.
So, uh, I mentioned all this, the, the
actual change in GHC nine dot two is
that exact print is now part of GHC.
So it's no longer a separate library.
And that just means.
More widely available.
You're guaranteed.
It's going to be up to date.
Those are good things.
>> Yeah.
So in there, in that explanation,
you did use a couple acronyms
that I wasn't sure of.
Um, and for the listeners, I
want to make sure that they
are also not in the dark there.
Um, I think you said AST.
>> Yes.
So AST stands for abstract syntax tree.
And what that means is typically the.
Like the source code you have in
a file is just a bunch of bytes,
they're characters, whatever, how
are you, however you encode them.
And then the compiler doesn't want
to deal with those bytes directly.
It wants to deal with an
abstract representation of them.
So programming languages are typically
typically pretty complicated, but
the same thing is true for like JSON,
you have like curly bracket, double
quote, something close, double quote
colon, and like, okay, that's great.
But really what I'm representing here is
JSON object, key name is this and value.
So an AST is essentially like a
abstract representation of the syntax.
Gotcha.
>> I feel like there was something
else, but I can't quite call it out.
And I know it's not an NDA
cause that's something else.
Uh, so, well, if whoever's
listening and they re see which
one that was and have a question.
Pink Taylor.
He'll, he'll answer it for you.
Cause I mean, you can pay
me, I'll research it, but I
can't guarantee the answer.
>> So ping you and then you can ask
me and then I'll tell you and perfect.
Tell
>> them I will just
play telephone with this.
Sounds like a great idea.
Awesome.
Well thank you, uh, for kind of diving
into those, uh, today and sharing
with us, uh, Really are some of the
highlights and top points of GHC 9.2 0.1.
Please do go look at the full spec
if you're interested in what changed.
Um, cause there's a
laundry list of things.
So, uh, definitely check it out.
Uh, hopefully soon we'll continue
to get every stack supporting 9.2
0.1 and, and all that fun stuff.
So.
Now that it's officially been released,
we can kind of wait for that ball roll
for all the, the full support for normal.
Uh, you know, obviously you can still use
9.2 0.1, but if you want it, you know,
>> it's a lot easier when
stackage has at least a nightly
snapshot for nine dot two dot one.
Cause that means most of the
libraries you probably depend on
have been updated to support it.
Um, and my expectation.
As someone who maintains a handful of
libraries is that upgrading to nine dot
two is probably going to be a little
bit easier than upgrading to nine dot.
Oh.
Um, from the change from eight
dot 10 to nine dot, oh, there were
a lot of internal changes in GHC
restructuring and stuff like that.
And so that made it hard for libraries
that depend on those internals to update.
And it seems like there aren't
as many with nine dot two.
>> Cool.
Well, thank you guys for listening.
Uh, yeah, you want
>> well, uh, I want to add one
thing to the outro and then you can
do the normal bit, which is, um, if
you guys have you listening, have any
questions about, you know, stuff we
talk about on this show, or if you have
suggestions for things you would like
us to talk about, please let one of
us know or tweet us at Haskell weekly.
Um, I would really.
Like to get into questions from
our listeners and, you know,
I, should we do this or that?
Or should we architect
things this way or that way?
I think Cameron and I have a fair
amount of experience working in
professional environments with Haskell.
And I'd love to share that with
the larger community, but it's
hard to just jump off of nothing.
You know, we need a need a prompt.
>> Yeah.
I would agree.
Um, yeah.
Sounds great to me.
Well, awesome.
Thank you guys for listening
to the Haskell weekly podcast.
Uh, we are a show about Haskell.
It's in the name.
That's pretty cool.
Uh, if you guys are interested,
please follow us @HaskellWeekly.
Um, or you can find us
online at HaskellWeekly.News
>> you got it.
And, uh, as per usual, we are brought
to you by my employer, ACI Learning.
Uh, if you want to go over to it
pro.tv and fill in promo code Haskell
weekly 30, you can get 30% off
the lifetime of your subscription.
So thank you for
>> using, because our
domain is it pro.tv and we
were purchased by ACI Learning.
So for, well, yeah, they were, uh,
my previous employer, one of us, one
>> of us,
>> but yeah, I mean, I spent,
I spent a long time there, so I feel
like even if I'm not there, it's
still part of it for some reason.
Um, I mean, I did just walk
into the building the other
day and just walk on in.
>> Security's really light
there, lose a ping pong game.
I did
>> Taylor Fausak beat me
on November 3rd, around 12:45 PM.
Not a
>> big deal.
We made a plaque, but it's not a big deal.
Yeah.
>> It's no biggie.
I was the reigning champion, but
you know, now I'll cry away, but
anyways, thank you guys for listening.
We'll catch you guys next week.
Peace.